you
in this lecture we are going to talk
about how to improve the instantiation
of the vector space model this is a
continual discussion of the vector space
model welcome the folks on how to
improve the instantiation of this model
in the previous lecture you have seen
that with simple sin instantiations of
the vector space model we can come up
with a simple scoring function that
would give us basically count of how
many unique query terms are matching the
document we also have seen that this
function has a problem as shown on this
slide in particular if you look at these
three documents they will all get the
same score because they matched three
unique query words but intuitively would
like a t4 to be ranked above t3 and t2
is really non relevant
so the problem here is that this
function couldn't capture at the
following heuristics first we would like
to give more credit to to t4 because it
matches the presidential more times than
d3 second intuitively matching
presidential should be more important
than matching about because about is a
very common word that occurs everywhere
it doesn't really carry that much
content so the English natural let's see
how we can improve the model to solve
these two problems it's worth thinking
at this point about why do we have these
four problems if we look back at
assumptions we have made while
instantiating the vector space model we
will realize that the problem is really
coming from some of the assumptions in
particular it has to do with how we
place the vectors in
baptists space so then naturally in
order to fix these problems we have to
revisit those assumptions perhaps who
have to use different ways to
instantiate the baptists based model in
particular we have to place the vectors
in a different way so let's see how can
you prove this one natural thought is in
order to consider multiple times of a
term in a document we should consider
the term frequency instead of just the
absence or presence in order to consider
the difference between a document where
a query term occurred on multiple times
and the one where the query term
occurred just once we have to consider
the term frequency the character of a
term in the document in the simplest
model we only model the presence and
absence of a time we ignored the actual
number of times that a term occurs in
the document so let's add this back so
we can do then represent a document by a
vector with some frequency as element so
that is to say now the elements of both
the query vector and the document vector
will not be zero at once but instead
there will be the counts of a world in
the query or the document so this was
bringing additional information about
the document so this can be seen as a
more accurate representation of our
documents so now let's see what the
formula would look like if we change
this representation so as you see on
this slide we still use dot product and
so the formula looks very similar in the
form in fact it looks identical but
inside the sum of course X I and why I
are now different there are the counts
of words I in the query and in the
document now at this point I also
suggest
to pause the laptop for a moment and
just think about how we can interpret
the scope of this new function it's
doing something very similar to what the
simplest that VSM is doing but because
of the change of the vector now the new
score has a different interpretation can
you see the difference and it has to do
with the consideration of multiple
occurrences of the same time in a
document more importantly we would like
to know whether this would fix the
problems of the simplest of vector space
model so let's look at this example
again
so suppose we change the vector return
agent to come frequency factors now
let's look at the these three documents
again the query vector is the same
because all these words occurred exactly
once in the query so the vector is the 0
1 vector and in fact d2 is also
essentially representing the same way
because none of these words has been
repeated many times as a result of the
score is also so same still 3 the same
issue 43 and we stay have a 3 but d4
would be different because now
presidential occurred twice here so the
end in the four presidential in the talk
to the vector would be 2 instead of 1 as
a result now the score 44 is high it's a
for now so this means by using term
frequency we can outrank thee for about
t 2 and these three as we hope to so
this software the problem with default
but we can also see that T 2 and T 3 are
still treated in the same way this they
have identical scores so it did not fix
the problem here
so how can we fix this problem
intuitively we would like to give more
credit for matching price ranges than
matching about but how can we solve the
problem in a general way is there any
way to determine which words should be
treated more importantly and which word
can be basically ignored about is such a
word and which she does not really care
that much content we can essentially
ignore that we sometimes call such a
water stop word those are generally very
frequently they occur everywhere
matching it doesn't really mean anything
but computation or how can we capture
that so again I encourage you to think a
little bit about this can you come up
with any statistical approaches do
somehow distinguish oppressed angel from
about now if you think about it for a
moment you will realize that what
difference is that a word like about
occurs everywhere so if you count the
currents of the world in the whole
collection then we would see that about
as much higher because it
then-presidential which tends to occur
only in some documents so this idea
suggested that we could somehow use the
global statistics of terms or some other
information to try to down wait the
element for about in the a vector with
written dating of t2 at the same time we
hope to somehow increase the weight of
presidential in the vector of d3 if we
can do that then we can expect that t2
will get the overall score to be less
than 3y at e3 we'll get the score above
three then we will be able to rank this
rate on top of d3 so how can we do this
systematically again we can rely on some
statistical counts and in this case
the particular idea is called an inverse
document frequency we have seen document
the frequency as one signal used in the
modern retrieval of functions we
discussed this in previous lecture so
here's a specific way of using it
document frequency is the count of
documents that containing a particular
term here we say inverse document
frequency because we actually want to
reward a word that doesn't occur in many
document and so the way to incorporate
this into our vector repetition is then
to modify the frequency count by
multiplying it by the IDF of the
corresponding word as Hume here if we
can do that then we can penalize common
words which generally have a lower IDF
and reward rail words which we have high
IDF so more specifically the IDF can be
defined as the logarithm of n plus 1
divided by K where m is the total number
of documents in the connection K is the
DF or document frequency the total
number of documents containing the word
W now if we plot this function by
varying K than you would see the curve
would look like this in general you can
see it would give a higher value for a
low DF or a rare work you can also see
the maximum value of this function is
log of n plus 1 will be interesting for
you to think about what's a minimum
value for this function this could be
interesting exercise now the specific
function may not be as important as the
heuristic to simply penalize popular
terms but it turns out that this
particular function form has also worked
very well
now whether there is a better form of
function here is still open research
question but it's also clear that if we
use a linear
penalisation like what shown here with
this line then it may not be as
reasonable as the standard IDF in
particular you can see the difference in
the standard IDF and we somehow have a
turning point here after this point that
we're going to say these terms are
essentially not very useful they can be
essentially ignored and this makes sense
when the term occurs so frequently and
let's say a term occurs in more than 50%
of the documents then the term is
unlikely very important and it's it's
basically a common term it it's not very
important to match this water so with
the standard IDF you can see it's
basically assuming that they all have
lower weights there's no difference but
if you look at the meaning of
canalization at this point that there is
there some difference so intuitively we
want to focus more on the discrimination
of low DF words rather than these common
words
well of course which one works better
still has to be validated by using the
empirically credited data set and we
have to use users to get which is
results are better so now let's see how
this can solve problem 2 so now let's
look at the two documents again now
without the idea of waiting before we
just have term frequency factors but
with the idea of waiting we now can
adjust the TF weight by multiplying with
the IDF value for example here we can
see is adjustment and in particular for
about there is adjustment by using the
IDF
about which is smaller than the IDF
value of presidential so if you look at
these the IDF will distinguish these two
words as a result of adjustment here
would be larger would make this weight
larger so if we score with these new
vectors then what would happen is that
of course they share the same weight for
news and a campaign but the matching of
about and presidential will discriminate
them so now as a result of IDF waiting
we will have d3 to be ranked above d2
because it matched real world whereas d
to match the common world so this shows
that the idea of weighting can solve
problem too so how effective is this
model in general when we use tf-idf
wedding well let's look at all these
documents that we have seen before
right these are the new scores of the
new documents but how effective is this
new weighting method and new scoring
function point so now let's see overall
how effective is this new ranking
function with tf-idf waiting here will
show all the five documents that we have
seen before and these are their scores
now we can see the scores for the first
of all documents here seem to be quite
reasonable they are as we expected
however we also see a new problem
because now T 5 here which did not have
a very high score with our simplest that
vector space model now actually has a
very high score in fact it has the
highest score here so this creates a new
problem this is actually a common
phenomenon in designing retrieval
functions basically when you try to fix
one problem you tend to introduce other
problems and that's why it's very tricky
how to design an effective ranking
function and what's what's the best
ranking function is there open research
question with such a sauce they are
working on that but in the next few
lectures the work and also talk about
some additional ideas to further improve
this model and try to fix this problem
so to summarize this lecture we've
talked about how to improve the vector
space model and we have got to improve
the instantiation of the vector space
model based on tf-idf waiting so the
improvement that most today is on the
placement of the vector where we give
higher weight to a term that occurred
many times in a document but
infrequently in the whole collection and
we have seen that this improvement model
indeed works better than the simple
vector space model but it also still has
some problems in the next lecture we're
going to look at how to address these
additional problems